Source: Minnesota Department of Transportation
http://www.dot.state.mn.us/ofrw/crude-by-rail/crude_faqs.html#four


What steps are railroads taking to prevent future accidents?
Railroad companies have voluntarily agreed to slow down oil trains in 45 "high-threat urban areas," including the Twin Cities. As of March 1, 2014, US DOT and the railroads have agreed to limit speeds in urban areas to 40 m.p.h. Previous speeds were 50 m.p.h. or more. Further steps include more frequent track and car inspections, stricter operating rules and better hazmat documentation. BNSF in particular is taking steps to build new cars with thicker walls and more quickly retiring older cars. Railroads are cooperating on training upgrades for local responders to meet current needs.


How much crude travels through Minnesota, including the Twin Cities, by rail each day?
On average, seven oil-carrying trains pass through Minnesota daily, with as many as six through the Twin Cities. Each train carries 3.3 million gallons of oil among 110 loaded cars.


Which railroad companies carry crude shipments in Minnesota?
The BNSF Railway and Canadian Pacific Railway originate almost all crude oil shipments from North Dakota's Bakken oil field. The Fort Worth, Tex.-based BNSF (Burlington Northern Santa Fe) railroad transports 75 percent of all North Dakota-produced oil.


Where are these shipments going?
The majority of the Bakken oil is shipped from oil fields in North Dakota through Minnesota to various refineries in the Midwest and Eastern seaboard.


What is Bakken oil? What are its qualities? Do local Minnesota refineries process this oil?
Oil from the Bakken field is characterized as a "sweet, light" crude, with the same consistency as diesel or jet fuel. The oil comes from deep beds of shale that is extracted through the application of new technology, including directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing. Bakken oil contains a high percentage of natural gas liquids, which increases its flammability. Minnesota refineries normally do not process Bakken crude, since they are designed to refine heavy sour crude oils such as Canadian tar sand oil.